this is the shrapnel of an exploded star
and this is a meteorite schem from over
4 billion years ago and this is what
Elon will kill for Wow and all of this
is to understand that fundamental
question people want to know how did we
get here and how does the question of
God tie into all of this well for the
first time in history we might be able
to answer that question with scientific
hard data Brian keting is an
astrophysicist and Professor whose
groundbreaking research and digestible
explanations uncover everything we want
to know about the universe and what lies
Beyond let me go way back 400 years ago
a genius named Galileo looked through a
telescope and he realized that we are
not the center of the universe and now
we know the universe is vaster than you
or I can comprehend how big would Earth
be on this table small not even a grain
of sand Even in our galaxy it wouldn't
be a grain of sand but we still don't
know how the universe began and so one
experiment took me to the South Pole to
the bottom of the planet and we thought
we discovered the creation of time and
space itself took me to the brink of a
novel prize we were on the front page of
every newspaper but it turned out we
didn't see that at all what we saw was
and we were
[Music]
crushed I don't get too emotional
but we had to retract these discoveries
and it was the most crushing experience
the scientists can have but you cannot
stop doing experiments to answer these
questions now you've launched this $2
million project yeah and the data that
this experiment is seeing is exquisite
because now we know 100% that
[Music]
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much Dr Brian
keing what is the mission that you on I
think I'm the luckiest man on earth I
get to get paid not that much but I get
to get paid to study the questions that
I was most interested in as a
12-year-old pimple face kid in Upstate
New York which is how did we get here
and I think it's the question that
people just want to know it's the only
question you can't know right what
happened before you were born you you
have to rely on other people's word for
it right you have to ask questions and
be curious and what is the only event
that ever happened for which there was
nobody around to ask and that's the
origin of our universe and the universe
contains everything contains life Minds
Consciousness everything down to you
know podcasters and and uh and daily
life what are some of the most sort of
controversial existential questions that
you seek to answer with all the research
that you do so you've talked about this
before on the show uh the the question
of of you know finite versus infinite
games and what we do in science science
is an infinite game right you can't win
science but along the way there's many
many finite games in other words fixed
competitions for which there's only one
Victor right I got you know uh offered a
professorship at UC San Diego that means
399 other people didn't get that job I
got tenure a lot of people don't get
tenure I got this I got that and then
eventually I didn't get you know spoiler
alert my first book's called losing the
Nobel Prize but there's only you know at
most three people that can win a Nobel
Prize every year in my field the the the
infinite game is comprised of many many
finite games and the most important
questions that generate the most
controversy the most heat the most
passion have to do with the nature of
the origin of our universe it's actually
not a settled science it's it's not
actually known for a fact whether our
universe came once existed in a certain
way eternally in a way I can describe
went through cycles of creation and
destruction and or it follows sort of a
Biblical creation narrative these are
all kind of open questions in a certain
sense and because they're not yet
resolved and because the only way to
resolve them is through data we cannot
actually answer these so the human mind
is in a hybrid it's in a super position
we kind of have a lot of knowledge but
we have a lot of questions we have a lot
of solutions but we have don't have a
lot of answers we're trying to
understand that fundamental question and
I always say I want to know what
happened on the Tuesday before the Big
Bang imagine this a day before which
there was no yesterday you couldn't even
speak about it if you were there
obviously nobody was there to witness it
but even conceptually speaking how does
time progress if time starts right we
think about time and time is very
Mercurial it's very hard to describe and
Define what time is is time what a watch
measures is time how your my hair gets
gray over the years is is time how you
know we perceive it sitting on a hot
stove versus being with a pretty
girlfriend are are those methods unequal
are they equally valid but at at its
base layer if the universe began if it
truly had a singular origin then time
came into existence at that as well and
how does the question of God tie into
all of this and what are the sort of I
guess the most controversial question is
is there a god or is there not a God
right and then a sub question to that
would be what form does this God take
are these questions that you SE to
answer me personally yes my colleagues
tend to shy away from it it's considered
somewhat anathema or distasteful for a
real honest to goodness you know work a
day scientist to talk about to even
contemplate the possibility of God and
for me I I call myself a practicing very
devout
agnostic in the sense that uh I I take
my Judaism in my case I'm I'm a I'm a
practicing Jew but the question of what
to take on faith which uh which in which
in Hebrew by the way the the word amen
comes from the Hebrew word amuna which
means faith it means to believe in
something I always say I don't believe
in gravity you know if I take this rock
and I I I don't have to believe in it I
have evidence for it science the word
science means knowledge it doesn't mean
you know uh faith it doesn't mean you
know religion or theology but for me
thinking about
God provides a certain the most um the
most luxurious or the most delightful
sort of spice to the research to the
hard work that I'm doing knowing that
the the team and I that are trying to
answer these questions we can possibly
resolve the question of whether or not
the universe began as for example it
begins in the Torah the Old Testament
the biblical narrative that underpins
the Judaism and Christianity and and
Islam as well of you know half the
world's population what if we could
substantiate that narrative what if we
could refute it a good scientist has to
be open to both so for me personally
I've always been interested in those
existential questions I I I I don't put
myself out there as a you know as a
rabbi or as some Exemplar of perfect as
religion but I'm trying I'm trying to
improve I'm trying to dedicate my life
to answering questions that others have
posed and stand on their shoulders to
hopefully get a closer glimpse of truth
but it's absolutely 100% in my mind
inexorably linked the question of a
Creator and the question of the its
creation or his creation if you will but
as I say for the first time in history
myself my colleagues and I we might be
able to start to answer that question
with scientific hard
data the question of whether there's a
God or not and which God is most
accurately represented by the science
yeah and the creation stories that those
religions tell themselves or tell the
world you've raised the 200 million
project what does that mean and what
what is the question you're seeking to
fundamentally answer with that $200
million project yeah let me take a step
back so for 2,000 years most scientists
people believe the universe was eternal
had been around
forever and then not not far from here
in uh north of north of Hollywood is a
telescope a 100 inch diameter telescope
you know five meters across and that
telescope was used by Edwin Hubble
Hubble observed that every single Galaxy
that he could see is moving away from
the Milky Way
galaxy so every Galaxy which are
collections of a 100 billion Suns just
like our sun is expanding away from us
how could he see that through a
telescope uh so he used What's called
the red shift so the red shift is an
effect that is related to what Christian
Doppler discovered called the Doppler
shift you ever heard an ambulance and
it's coming towards you and it gets
higher in frequency it goes
away that's the Doppler shift the waves
of sound are piling up their frequency
is getting short uh getting higher and
higher the wavelength is getting piled
up in the direction it's going the the
the source and it's getting lower in the
opposite direction the same exact thing
happens with light instead of getting
higher pitch in and lower pitch lower
frequency means redder colors so red is
a longer wavelength of light than is
blue light he saw everything is moving
away from it Us in the Milky Way it was
a very puzzling Discovery it went
against 2,500 years of received wisdom
he observed it with data it was
incontrovertible every single Galaxy is
moving away from the Milky Way galaxy
our galaxy
he said either you know we didn't put on
our Cosmic deodorant and no one wants to
be around us or the universe is getting
bigger tomorrow it will be bigger than
it was today the separation between
galaxies will be larger than it is today
the implication Stephen if you go back
another day before today yesterday
things were closer keep playing that
movie backwards you come to a point
perhaps a singularity where all the
matter all the energy everything that is
was or ever will be was concentrated
effectively at a single point that's the
big bang and so in the Big Bang
cosmology the universe starts at a
particular moment time comes into
existence the elements come into
existence all the elements you know in
in water you know instead of hydrogen in
water rather they all come into
existence and then over billions of
years those elements come together over
the force of gravity they uh will
eventually fuse two hydrogens together
to make helium and so forth and you get
the heavier and heavier elements
eventually those objects called Stars
they eventually burn up and blow up in
what's called a supernova and before
they blow up they create all sorts of
other matter that we're made of calcium
oxygen nitrogen iron and in their death
throw in their explosive fireworks like
ending of their lives they give life to
us because they blast out into the
cosmos into the Galaxy the material that
we're made of so literally as Carl Sean
said we are star stuff and I brought
some star stuff here today so this is
these are different byproducts this is
the shrapnel of an exploded
star this is mostly made of iron here I
brought these and I give these away on
my website I made a special website for
your listeners briank king.com
diary this is a meteorite Stephen you
ever seen a meteor in the atmosphere
that's a rock like that a mineral
coursing through our atmosphere at tens
of thousands of miles per hour how' you
know how do we know we measure their
velocity we can track them on radar how
do you know that this is a meteor oh
this has all the characteristics of a
meteorite it's composition its density
it's a structure it has that weird
pattern on it but if you're really
curious what we could do so where's this
come from then or this one was found in
uh in uh in Argentina in a place called
the field of the stars and this could
have come from anywhere in the universe
exactly this came from this is basically
a fragment of an asteroid that EX
existed before the Earth Steven this is
a fragment a fossil relic of our solar
system from over four billion years ago
older than our Earth because our Earth
formed at its core our Earth has iron
inside of it it has an iron core just
like that that's pretty heavy right
that's not and it also made this here
this if you give this to your sweetheart
if you compress this by 100 thousand
times and give it to your sweetheart
she'll be really happy about that that's
pure carbon so that'll turn into a
diamond that'll turn into a diamond
I like to say you know pressure is what
turns dust into diamonds for anyone that
can't see this right now it looks like a
a dice it's it's almost identical to
like a black dice exact yep it's very
light now contrast that to and here's a
piece of rock this is mostly volcanic
rock I collected that in uh in
Antarctica I've been to Antarctica twice
to the South Pole I collected that
specimen there it has holes in it see
the holes those come from bubbling
escaping volcanic gases so there's
volcanoes down at the the South uh at
the in Antarctica not the South Pole and
then here's this one this is found oh
gosh
Namibia so this is a meteorite formed in
found in Namibia also from the same
process that formed our solar system
this was found by the natives that lived
there uh several hundred or maybe even a
thousand years ago this one's
particularly nice if you're not watching
it it looks like a human foot and I
can't explain how unbelievably heavy
that is yes I didn't think I've held
something thing that's this size but
this heavy before it's extremely dense
it's one it's the dense so what happens
when a star tries to make the iron in
that it takes more energy to make that
fuse that nuclei of iron than is given
off in the fusion process so therefore
the star can't support its weight it
collapses it explodes and rebounds now
when your listeners or viewers you know
go to my website and if they win one um
uh you'll see how attractive these
things are to magnets it's a very uh
powerful it's called a rare earth magnet
neodymium magnet
Jesus so attach it to the meteorite it's
fine to do that you can do
that wow that sound I love that sound a
ping so this
material is highly
magnetic and iron which is primarily the
constitution of this meteorite is has
the exact same chemical structure as in
your blood there's a molecule called
hemog globin mhm it's almost identical
to the chlorophyll molecule that plants
have except chlorophyll has a magnesium
atom at the center of its chemical
Matrix but in hemoglobin that's going
through your veins right now is iron
that iron came from that Supernova
eventually your mother you know and the
food that you eat has some iron in it
and your body starts to produce blood
and that blood has the same chemical
composition as the Stars so this 200
million what are you doing okay we gonna
give back back to the money y exactly so
what is the fundamental question you're
seeking to answer so let's say you see
someone shooting a f a gun right you
want to see the but you see the smoke
from the gun you see the bullet moving
at great speed but you'd like to see who
actually shot it was it God you know was
it was it mother nature was it some
Quantum fluctuation in the Multiverse
and so we're trying to capture that to
to take a picture of the infant Universe
to take the earliest baby picture
possible using sensors that are
sensitive to in to uh microwave light
that we cannot see that's invisible to
us we could capture a pattern which
would only be present if the universe
had a singularity if it went through
this incredible rupture of SpaceTime
called The Big Bang the details of the
experiment were worked out over several
years we realized we had to go down to
the South Pole to the bottom of the
planet a place that was only reached 112
years ago and the enemy of what I'm
trying to detect is water water absorb
absorbs microwaves that's how your
microwave oven Works to heat up coffee
so we we took that telescope there we
made an
observation we claim we detected that
baby picture that snapshot that
reverberations of the creation of time
and space itself called
inflation we were heralded around the
world that this is the greatest
discovery of all time in science
literally there was just one problem
when we made this measurement we were
aware that we could fool ourselves into
seeing what we wanted to see because we
knew how important this discovery would
be but we kind of convinced ourselves
that we had seen the true birth pangs of
the Big
Bang
but it turned out we didn't see that at
all instead what we saw were trillions
and trillions of tons of dust in our
galaxy for technical reasons it mimicked
the signal of the big
bang and we were crushed it literally
dust
we saw Cosmic dust the leftover
byproducts of exploded Stars just want
to be clear here so I'm um I don't want
to move on until I fully understand so
you you went down to the South Pole yeah
you looked up expecting to see these
sort of these waves that show that the
universe is expanding yes what you
actually saw like lines of dust right is
that a simplified way of say but you
thought you'd s seen these sort of
microwaves of the universe exping
exactly simplifying it perfectly we made
this discovery and then immediately
effectively in scientific terms 6 months
later this is an early 2015 we basically
had to admit we were wrong and
fortunately for me and for the universe
as a whole um I was very close with a
man named Jim Simons he was a Monumental
scientist mathematician without peer
effectively and he said Brian I I've
been thinking about this experiment and
um I want to I want to have a lger so he
put together this this dream team and
we're still together to this day we're
building an observatory in Chile not the
South Pole in Chile to do what bicep
couldn't do bicep being the telescope
you built in the South South po y that
lost the Nobel Prize in my first Books
language and we're just now getting data
it got first light a month before Jim
Simons passed away and so we were able
to show him the data that this
experiment is is is seeing I can't show
it to you is as confidential as a diary
is you hope nobody's looking but you
don't know if anybody is I can't show it
to you but the data is exquisite so what
do you um what do you suspect is the
origin of the
universe well uh is it God is it some
kind of strange Cosmic reaction that
took place for no reason at all I know
you must have a
suspicion you know if the universe began
with a singular Big Bang if it began on
a certain day or it didn't I just want
to know the truth the interpretation of
it that's going to be going on for I
mean people are battling about as I said
we thought we detected that signal right
so we already have um a simulation of
what will happen when this is discovered
for good finally and no dust right we
know exactly what the media will say at
that time on one side of the equation
were the greatest you know religious
thinkers and theologians of the time
saying this proves the existence of God
that God created the universe in a
singular moment let there be light Fiat
Lux that's exactly what the Torah the
Old Testament the Bible says so they
said it it agrees with our hypothesis on
the other side there were militant
atheists Richard Dawkins you know other
people saying this proves there's no
need for a God the universe came into
existence like you said meaningless
Quantum field the fluctuation out of
nothingness it proves nothing about God
in fact it invalidate literally Stephen
there were people publishing articles in
major newspapers everywhere that proves
God proves no God so it's not like I'm
going to think that I have the tarity to
say I'm going to be the final word or
we're going to be the final word I know
this is going to resonate and echo
through the through the you know anals
of history but at the same time we could
also see nothing and that's the hardest
thing when you see nothing the human
mind doesn't like ambiguity you know
like you can talk about um something
very uh you know non-controversial let's
talk about abortion rights let's talk
about trans rights let's no these are
incredibly controversial things right so
what does the human mind do it selects a
side it says no abortions abortion for
everybody no trans rights yes trans
rights uh immigration no immigration yes
IM the human mind hates that and for
good reason there's an old Yiddish
expression he who stands in the middle
of the road gets hit by both sides of
the traffic so the human mind Cleaves to
one side or the other I don't think you
know in terms of you know religion or
whatever that we'll be the defendant of
final word on it but it's sort of a
privilege to play the
game what is the most compelling
evidence that you've ever encountered
that there might be a
god this is a long uh long question well
I I hope you'll find it someday too
um at least in my religion in
Judaism God is the Creator and he's the
organizer he creates um light and
darkness he creates day and night he
creates Heaven and Earth he creates
beasts and um and Earth and fishes and
so forth and then he creates man
and we can't really emulate God even if
you don't believe in God you can imagine
what a God would be like right you can
conceptualize imagine you know King
Charles you know times a trillion or
whatever like the all powerful force but
at the same time we're told God as a
father Our Father who art in heaven
right um and he's a Lord he's he's like
a politician he's a king he's their
father in this judeo-christian concept
it's hard to kind of reconcile what that
means because we don't really have
analogies to it but the one analogy we
do get is the one thing that we can
create which is a which is a human now I
think for that reason men and women have
a stake in what it means to feel a
connection to God women much more so
it's almost impossible to for a man to
comprehend what it's like to have the
ability to be a vessel for life's
creation I think that's part of the
evidence for it um I also think that
there's some there's some Clues but
again it's not proof you cannot prove
God exists you cannot prove God doesn't
exist you have to be comfortable with
that ambiguity and very few people are
if we came from a single cell organism
as some people say then there was then
giving birth seems to be quite a New
Concept because you know if you think
about some of the evolutionary stories
of you know the single cell organism
that then divided and then you know
darwinism's theory that it was the
environment that defined how we give
birth and different animals give birth
or replicate in different ways so if you
go back far enough it seems that like
giving birth as we know it which is this
like process where the baby comes out
and they cut the cord is actually quite
recent in the history
of Consciousness but also just like
living
organisms does that make it more or less
miraculous or it's so amazing but it it
doesn't feel like it gives
me I don't know there's something in my
mind that thinks if a single cell
organism I don't know gazillion years
ago split because of some mutation which
caused more single cell organisms to
split I
mean I guess it's still creation isn't
it and then you could ask the question
what if there was a Creator and this
Creator not only um you you know created
that first cell but created within that
cell the possibility the propensity and
had the knowledge you know we can't
comprehend it but but had the knowledge
that that will eventually make a person
and have Consciousness and be able to
conceptualize God now I'm not saying
that's evidence for it but just you can
you can you can see which would be a
greater miracle that like God encrypted
in the DNA code that eventually there'll
be a Steven Bartlett or Brian keing or
you know that those are natural
processes that are the inevitable
conclusion of of creation of life and
evolution as you say in darwinian theory
for which we have abundant evidence
right I don't know which is more
miraculous and and that's
why you know Miracles humans are pretty
new aren't they so oh yeah mam mammals
like how old is the conscious human the
conscious I mean the first like Homo
sapiens that are of our species probably
200,000 years old maybe so it's only
been for 200,000 years that we've been
even been able to think about the
possibility of God which is almost a
weird way way it almost you could say
God has only existed for 200,000 years
right yeah that's was a good way of
putting it and and in fact many people I
like to say this you know to you like
what's your favorite day of the year
like on the
calendar I was going to say day okay I
always ask people that I say like what's
your favorite day and usually I'll get
um Christmas uh my anniversary my
birthday my first kid's birthday
whatever but those are all Origins we
fascinated by Origins cuz you weren't
like you can't witness like the whole
process of your birth you have to rely
on mother and your father and maybe
there's some pictures and a nurse but
now go back to the beginning of the
universe well maybe there was only one
entity you know maybe it was only God
and why did God make the universe and
then of course there's many many
questions the the most kind of stringent
you know are are or perhaps most
challenging question is you know why
does evil
exist why would a good God create
suffering you know childhood leukemia
like it doesn't make any sense so the
the standard answer for that question
question is that to not have Randomness
to not have chaos to not have um
variability in life would would
necessitate a predetermined existence
and a lot of people believe that I've
talked Sam Harris in my podcast he's
been on here um he believes strict
determinism every single thing what's
happening to us right now the words that
are coming out of my mouth your uh ear
twitching or whatever it's to that's all
determined there's no control there's
free will is a complete and utter
illusion
and uh because of that then there
doesn't have to be an explanation of why
there's you know leukemia in children or
whatever and and yes that is that is an
unanswered question and I think but but
I don't think it's a sufficient question
not to do stuff people would ask why
does a child get leukemia but they won't
ask why do um humans experience uh the
highest the highest Pleasures the
highest Sensations both physically
viscerally but also emotionally and
spiritually that we unique among all the
Creations on earth have this ability to
appreciate our finite existence to have
love to have you know whatever this
connections are that's what makes life
living now we can't answer why is that
like do we deserve that so for me the
evil and good and like Pleasure and Pain
make lots of sense from an evolutionary
perspective it makes a lot of sense as
to why you would feel this overwhelming
sense of like love and protection when
you gave birth when your your your son
or your daughter arrives in the world
because that that feeling is passed down
from your ancestors and your ancestors
had that feeling so they survived and
their offspring survived and that
feeling gets stronger as it's passed
down because those that have it are more
likely to pass on their DNA so the DNA
of that feeling keeps passing through
the through the generation so I get that
and then with the with evil I also I can
also understand that pretty well um
because you know if we think of evil
maybe as a feeling or something that
happens or a disease I can understand
that evil is human is is human related
there's no evil cancer cancer is not
evil and even that I can understand
because I can understand the brain is so
fragile and I can understand all these
human instincts and chemicals and
jealousy and you know all of even love
comes with it you know if some if if a
woman dies it's probably a husband
statistically so like I understand you
know that's evil isn't it but but it's
love as well so I understand that the
complexities of all of that what I can't
understand
is what role God is playing in any of
this stuff and yeah I was I was
religious until I was 18 and then I
think I I fell down a rabbit hole
listening to like Richard Dawkins and
some of the others and Sam Harris and it
left me in a position where I would
probably Define myself as being agnostic
but there's still this big question mark
which hangs above my life which is like
where did where did human life come from
and is there is it possible that it just
didn't come from anyone is it possible
that there was a big bang you know at
the very start of all of this it caused
lots of reactions one such reaction was
fusing some chemicals which fused in the
right order over millions and millions
of years and it started to move in a way
that like plants can't move and that
then LED rise to the sort of
evolutionary process and now here I am
and my brain was just bigger 200,000
years ago than the other monkeys so now
that I've develop this thing called
conscious where I can think about things
and here I am trying to figure it all
out now that I have this bigger brain
thanks to wian evolution is that is that
the game and it's and you know when
people hear me say that they probably
think oh you know the the natural
reaction to that is because it threatens
your sense of like purpose and belonging
and it threatens Justice your natural
reaction to that is no I hope it's not
and so let me think of ways that that
can't possibly be true but I'm I'm not
tempted by that I'm tempted by figuring
out what's true irrespective of how warm
and fuzzy it is MH and um I still don't
know but I'm hoping
science has some answers for me well
yeah sorry to disappoint right now the
the the connection that logical chain
that you that you produced has a lot of
so-called missing links but I you said
something that's very interesting to be
you said you consider yourself an
agnostic it sounds like in other words
it sounds to me like you're more you're
doing things that an atheist does like
you're not going to church you're not um
you know observing mass or whatever you
would do if you're but what do you do do
do and they because if you're an
agnostic there should be some Behavior
that's similar to a theist why because
then you're just an atheist right I mean
in other words how do you what practices
I'm a behaviorist in in in my life you
know so I judge people on how they act
and how they behave and and you know a
lot about this so how do you do you
behave as if there could be a god do you
you said maybe you want science to
explain it you didn't say like I would
like to have a personal revelation from
Jesus I I would like to encounter him or
whatever V I don't care what religion is
but how do you in practice live your
life such that if God does exist that
that it would make a difference in the
way that you're perceived or judged if
you will yeah well I I I don't because I
guess I don't know what I don't know
what practice because I don't know what
God exists or what story is true I don't
know what practice is true do you think
of god let's say you were um Hindu right
yeah let's say let's say you're not
Hindu let's say you are what you are
Presbyterian or the Church of if I had a
practice wouldn't that make me religious
well I'm saying do you think if there is
a God we have to do this Matrix right we
have to say God exists God doesn't exist
even behaves like he's religious Steph
doesn't behave like he's religious right
so right now you're in one of those
quadrants you you're not sure God exists
um so you're behaving maybe as if he
doesn't exist and I'm asking you and now
he could exist or he could not exist so
imagine you move into another quadrant
you say I'm going to behave like I'm
Hindu or come down to my temple in San
Diego whatever you're going to behave in
some religion do you think if God exists
he's GNA say oh God Stephen you picked
the wrong one it's not it's not uh it's
it's jism it's it's um it's whatever
it's it's um it's um uh Latter-Day Saint
I I don't think I think a revolutionary
statement I think God has common sense
if he exists if he doesn't exist it
doesn't matter what you do right but if
God exists he must have common sense
meaning that if you make make an Earnest
attempt to understand or at least engage
yourself religiously not believe and
force yourself to believe not make
excuses for evil that happens in the
world or cancer for kids but if you
behave in a certain way I don't think if
God exists big if you'll be judged
harshly I this is exactly the conclusion
that stopped me being religious when I
was 18 really yes exact conclusion
because so we'd go to um church every
week we grew up going to church read the
Bible all of those things and then I
when I was younger I was operating under
the assumption that I was going to go to
hell and burn if I didn't like obey this
this person in the sky then I read these
books I St Richard Dawkins books and a
bunch of other books on the subject
matter and I heard that God was
omnipotent and omniscient which makes a
lot of sense because if you create this
world and you can you know you're you're
active in it you must be pretty powerful
and pretty knowing and then I concluded
that if I basically concluded God would
have common sense and I thought he would
understand that I'm struggling and he
would understand that as long as I live
a good life and I'm not murdering people
and I'm not mean to people and I'm kind
and I'm respectful to people and I'm a
net positive on the earth then if Heaven
does exist any God that I would want to
support anyway would let me in and he
would understand that I didn't have
enough information to to put my flag in
any particular religion so he would let
me in so my my thesis then became well
just be a good person and you're kind of
hedging your best because any decent God
that's I think worth supporting would go
that was a decent person he couldn't
quite see it you know whatever but but
you wouldn't see it a little I sorry to
push back but if you if you let's say I
say I want to get in shape Stephen and
and yeah I deserve it got kids you know
I want to be healthy live a long life
but you see me eating you know I
wouldn't eat cheeseburgers kosher but
hamburgers french fries you know just
just and I'm say well like you know
whatever we'll understand like I in
other words you you would agree that if
you knew God exists you would do you
would behave very radically different L
right if if I if you had an encounter
with god well Jesus or or God himself
right it depends if I knew for sure that
he existed and a particular book and
Doctrine was correct I would 100% behave
in line with that book IND Doctrine but
if I knew he existed but I didn't know
which book was correct then I probably
would behave exactly how I do
now so because the behavior the practice
the Sabbath comes from one of those
books or doctrines so right but but even
if you couldn't choose right what if
it's like um what if it's possible that
all of them are right and all of them
are wrong in other words you um we are
so frail fragile and and and inadequate
to the task of understanding what the
true nature of God is that he made it
such that again I'm not saying this is
true but but it made it possible that
there would be ways of interpretation
for how he existed right like I as a Jew
don't believe in Jesus's Divinity right
but I don't I don't fult my friends
friends you know jbot a CH I don't fault
him I don't in fact I think it's
beautiful that that's his Avenue for
worship he believes that Jesus died for
his personal sins now you would admit
that you would have uh Jesus will still
die for your sin or you know he did die
for your sins if you're an Axe Murderer
you know so I just think that level of
saying it's um as long as I don't murder
anybody you know it's like me saying
well you know if I'm destined to get
into shape I'll get in shape you know my
metabolism will work it out without me
taking this the the serious action and
working hard because you do it in your
rest of your life right and I'm not by
the way I'm not prosing it's actually
forbidden in My Religion I'm not Pros
but but the but that concept of God is
uh that Richard Dawkins doesn't believe
in I also don't believe in that like
he's omniscient he's gonna prevent you
know babies from dying from caner he's
going to do this or that like that's
where they make fun of it um or they
they they relegate it to the a friend in
the sky you called it right I I don't
believe there's a friend in the sky I
don't think that even makes sense um but
I believe that we are seeing something
so heavily refracted again if it exists
it's it's like uh showing a microwave
telescope you know showing bicep or the
Simon's Observatory uh to you know Gog
who lived in a cave 200,000 years ago
like there's no way to get from there to
here but that doesn't mean like there
isn't an ultimate there an Ultimate here
for me I I let me just say the final
thing I want to say because I don't want
to make too much about this but but um
there's a value in practicing even if
you don't believe just like I say
sometimes like even if you got divorced
like you should still get married
because it changes you and it opens you
up to the full panoply of human
experience that a lot of people don't
get to experience and when people have
the capacity the capability to do it
they should in my opinion uh by the way
I'm not advocated to get divorced either
but but the point being uh you obviously
wrestle with it and and um interestingly
enough the word Israel which is the
central you know country of of judaic
faith means fight with God it means
wrestle with God L is God Israel means
fight so how do you wrestle with it do
you wrestle with it do you think about
it or do you say you know I'm not going
to read these books that I read before I
was 18 because it seems so childish to
me now and so I I do I certainly wrestle
with it so when I say wrestle with it
not in a way that is causing me any pain
or Agony or deep frustration but
it's it's yeah it's a recurring thought
and I actually think from doing this
podcast and just um like maybe growing
up and
uh the journey I've been on I
have more questions now than I ever have
since I became agnostic at 18 so I have
more questions now it's funny I've been
on this bit of an arc where I was
certain when I was younger that God was
real and then I was really um certain
that the god I believed in probably
wasn't real and now i' kind of find
myself going back to a position where
I'm like almost like I'm starting the
research project again to figure out
what actually is what actually is real I
sometimes wonder if I'm looking for the
wrong thing cuz I think because we've
been so sort of indoctrinated into this
idea that it is a man in the sky and all
these the white beard and stuff so we're
like looking for evidence of that but
maybe I should be searching for evidence
of something else is it like a feeling
I'm searching for is it it's interesting
that you said that it REM reminds me of
Einstein Einstein said um he never asked
his father what would happen daddy if I
was traveling at the speed of light and
I looked at myself in a mirror and he
said it was good I didn't ask those
questions when I was five because my dad
would have given me this standard answer
of the 1800s which was you know you see
a reflect or whatever and then Einstein
said I would have just accepted that and
then I would never have gone on to
create the theory of relativity what you
said Echoes what he said because if you
if you had asked these questions and
just accepted the belief that you had
when you were 12 you would not be
approaching them with the maturity of a
Steven Bartlett at age 32 right and now
you have this perspective you have a
wisdom that you've accured from your
life experiences from the the millions
of people that you've helped around the
world to expose them to different things
and you're on a journey yourself so
anyway I I I just I don't so I don't
have tolerance for scientists that
dismiss it and say it's stupid and I'm
like but I also I I I find that
religious people are too comfortable
saying everything is described by God
everything happens because of God and I
see this a lot with religious children
um sometimes I'll go into kids school
and teach them uh you know about science
I'll bring these you know props and
stuff uh but when I talk to them
sometimes I'll say like oh look there's
a rainbow over there oh that's great
where did it come from they'll say God
made it
I think that's I joke that's a form of
child abuse you know if you just say
that God made it you're a completely
ignorant about the science but B you're
also diminishing God's power right if
you say No actually that's an effect of
of water droplets which are formed
hydrogen oxygen and here's their
chemistry and here's how they form uh
different state of matter when they're
in Collective and here's how that causes
light to defract at different
wavelengths and here's wavelength
electromagnetic radiation where does
that come and you keep asking the
question why why why why only when you
get to the question the answer the final
answer I don't know that's the only time
I would say Okay God could come in there
but that takes you back you know that
whole chain of refraction of light of
dialectric material of of of wavelengths
of of color all that that takes you back
till almost to the Big Bang which then
intersects with what I do you said um
that you think of God as almost like a
force do you think it's a conscious
Force I if you if I sit down and pray to
this God will they hear me I honestly
kid say I don't know but I know that
you'll change I know that you'll hear
yourself okay if you can go down to the
ocean student if you can go down to the
Pacific Ocean and just be isolated and
just pour yourself out for an hour I
guarantee it will change your life you
will be in tears but no one will see you
that's the thing that's why you have to
be alone you cannot do it with any other
person you must do it on your own
because there's no Sam Harris meditation
waking up app it's not going to do the
same for you as as just you alone and
not knowing is part of the point I think
but what's that got to do with God
what's me going down to the beach and
pouring my heart out which would get me
into my amigdala it'll get me thinking
about you know it'll make me emotional I
can imagine you know even listening to
certain music can make you feel that
what what role is God playing in in that
moment because if God exists I do
believe that he's inside of you and that
you can connect with him again you can't
detect him with an MRI machine or you
can't detect him with a laser but you
know can if again it's a big if I'm not
guaranteeing you know I'm sorry to
disappoint I'm not that kind of doctor
you know I I can't give you a
prescription that'll make you believe
but to have access to it you have to be
open to a communication right imagine
you got you know a a you know an email
and you just never respond to it like
people remember the movie Interstellar
You' seen that movie so uh there you
know the the people on Earth are
communicating with the people you know
Matthew mcc's daughter and she she
doesn't know if he's listening he
doesn't and he knows that she's but in
that sense he's kind of like this like
he has knowledge that she doesn't have
but if she doesn't try maybe she
wouldn't maybe just the aspect of trying
the attribute of trying is what opened
her up to that return signal the
communication that she eventually
received so interesting because when I
asked the question about can God hear me
and if he can hear me I guess the second
question is can he do anything about
what he's
hearing um there's so much evidence in
the world that he can't hear you and
he's not going to do anything about it
but again you say that but like what if
uh you know know who knows if if you're
if your parents you know like they were
a lot of the stories in the early in
Testament are about sterile Barren women
that couldn't conceive you know from
Sarah Rebecca to to Rachel all these
women they couldn't conceive they cried
out they they prayed and again women are
closer to God in many ways because they
contain life within them um again in
what sense are you not already the
recipient of the beneficence of
something that we just don't understand
like potentially yeah but but but when I
ask this question about like could I if
I pray is it going to influence my
outcomes in any way you know there's a I
don't believe it does I I I don't
believe it does for the reason I said
before like people were praying here for
the Dodgers I'm sure there were equally
virtuous people praying for the an
that's what I mean if you think about
the scientific method that's why I said
I don't we could we could apply that and
say does prayer work right and you could
get I don't know look through history at
the Holocaust or look at some other
world natural disaster and think it has
praying swayed the the probabilities of
bad things happening to people so I
don't believe that at all but I do
believe that fundamentally a a person
who believes that their um that their
actions have some impact will feel at
least a sense of gratitude let me let me
give you an example you're familiar in
Christianity you know people say a
blessing before the meal like grace
before a meal so in Judaism you do that
before the meal after the meal sometimes
during the meal uh but the point is the
more you Express gratitude you you
cannot be a happy person and be being an
ingrate Yeah the more you're grateful
for like the sound of you know of of you
know a song that is just so meaningful
to you the sight of a painting or a
sunset the more that you're s and in
Judaism we say blessings for those
things like we say if we see a meteor
shower we say a blessing it's hard for
me as an astronomer you got to say
blessing a rainbow another thing those
are like kind of things we become
desensitized to in life and we just take
for granted when you taste a a fine wine
or you taste you know some delicious
food again it could just be chlorophyll
here's Stephen have here's your plate of
agar gum like okay great I could live
here's whey powder that's all you ever
get to eat and you'd be like this sucks
I know what I'm Ahad and if I could only
go back to it after I get out you know
of the situation I'm going to be so
grateful to me that grateful gratitude
connects to the ultimate source of that
provided that we can't understand it's
true I cannot give you and I told you I
have problems with prayer because I
don't like to be told what to do I don't
like to be told I have to say this in
this order stand up sit down fast on
this day do this thing not eat that
delicious pink guy with the curly tail
like but when you do that you know this
the more you're disciplined the happier
your life is you know who's who's more
happy the guy who eats everything he
wants or Joo you know like the the the
person who just gives into all their
Temptations of alcohol the person who
abstains and and elevates what they do
and I think we want to elevate ourselves
above the level of an animal of the
animals but I can have all those
behaviors of like a gratitude practice I
can have a meditation practice I go down
to the beach I can do all of those
things and I still I can still do all of
those things without the need of a god
oh sure and I'll get all the benefits of
those things I'd get when I when I
Express gratitude before I eat or
sometimes when I'm getting on a plane
and I I I touch the plane to remind
myself and I can always make myself
emotional just thinking about how
remarkable it is that I get to do some
of the things I've been able to do in my
life to the point of like physical
emotion yeah um but without the presence
of
of needing to equate that to a god in
any
way so I'm I'm trying to find I guess
I'm searching for where God fits in all
of this why why is why is God why is a
god required is it just because I have
so many blessings that I should be
thankful to someone for these things
which I do contem with I go okay and let
me think about how my life has changed
in the last 10 years of you know from
going from some of those shoplifting
pizzas to sitting here and getting to do
these it's it's remarkable you you start
to think you're a little bit in the
Treeman show if you're not if you think
about it too deeply but um and you do
feel you think who do I thank for this
so you think do I thank my parents like
right do I thank myself so you do I
thank a god um but I but is that the
reason it just to just just to be
thankful but then I go there's a bias
there because there's kids in the town
in Botana that I was born in that are
still in the town in Botswana that I was
born in and they're not doing so good so
they do they have did God not like them
did and then if you go no God likes both
of you then I go okay well then God
isn't responsible for this it was
something that I did or my parents did
that responsible for this so I should
thank them so where does God fit again
and I just go around in these loops and
I go I don't know what are we trying to
create a God to make sense of the things
we feel and the experiences we have and
the baby that grabs our finger and the
Gratitude and the the the the solar
eclipse and the the sunset are we trying
to trying to give that to someone
because it's just so the a is just so
much or did God give that to
us well I mean the perspective that
you're bringing is obviously you've
thought about this a lot and obviously
your attitude is healthy and I think
that you have you know unbalanced I
think yeah obviously living as a a good
life even if you I'd never say that an
atheist can't be a good person or can't
be happy or any of these things the
question is what where does it augment
and affect your life like for example I
don't know if I would give 10% of my
income to charity before tax income to
charity if I if it wasn't a commandment
in My Religion but I don't shame for
that I don't feel like oh you needed
religion to tell you this because again
I'm still searching just as much as I
think that you are I don't feel like uh
as untroubled by the answers of it right
I don't feel like that not knowing for
sure that God exists which I don't
believe is possible anyway that that
should be an impediment to me practicing
giving charity being in a community um
uh raising my kids with an appreciation
of their history and their culture um
and and just the contrib R butions of
their religion of your religion whatever
to to the world so if you found out from
this new project that you've you've
launched this 2 million $200 million
project that you've launched to figure
out the existence of I guess where the
not the existence but the origin of the
universe the origin of life if you found
out unequivocally that God isn't real
convinces you to the point that you now
believe that God is not the creator of
the universe and that I don't know you
figure out some other way we can create
universes in little Labs maybe a
thousand years from now we can create
our own little universes from nothing
somehow or we find out we're in
simulation yeah whatever yes exactly how
does that change
you because I'm a
behaviorist I I I don't I really don't
feel like my life would be better to act
as if God doesn't exist in other words
if I know God doesn't exist then I'm
gonna act like he doesn't exist right
that's a logical assumption yeah right
so I'm going to stop giving charity like
is that going to make me happy in life
is that going to benefit Society or my
or you know Zeus or whatever doesn't
exist like I already know that's not
true right so I've kind of done this
experiment like all these other gods I
know I don't believe in raah you know a
so you wouldn't do anything differently
benefits to my life are so substantive
that I would not change my behavior but
you you're being guided then by your be
your behavior and the rewards from
Behavior which is pretty much my life
yeah well okay so right the breath work
and the meditation I'm being Guided by
like if gratitude feels good I do it if
going down to the beach feels good I do
it if having a baby feels good I'll do
it you know so like it could be
dangerous to Dev add God to my life or
take it away my behaviors are going to
be the same because I'm I'm being Guided
by the things that are making me feel
good but I don't think so you're not
like those hidden istic Instagram
influencers no because that would make
me feel good like a donut I've run the
experiment and eating the donut makes me
feel okay for the time it's touching my
tongue but then bad for 12 hours when my
gut starts reacting badly so I don't do
that anymore well let me ask you this
question so if they found out that uh
working out is uh eventually it's it's
actually going to shorten your life or
it's going to do the opposite of what
you're intending it to do necessarily
would you keep working
out how much is it going to short My
Life by um every uh every uh you know ab
crunch you do every bench press takes a
an hour off your life or something or a
couple minutes off your life oo this
it's an interesting one um
I would probably
live 10 years less to
live like 10 years better like to have a
better health span so I Pro if you told
me I was going to live to aund 100 with
without working out or I could live to
90 but I'm going to be strong and fit
for those 90 years I'll take the 90
years so in my analogy that's exactly
right so I feel like that level of of
perfecting or enjoyment and the Ary
benefits of
gratitude uh and and happiness that I've
received tangibly you cannot convince me
as I can't convince you that working out
feels I couldn't convince you working
out is bad it feels bad for you it does
something to you physically mentally
emotionally um I won't say spiritually
but for me to see the benefits to see
the things that I've seen like like look
Stephen I've buried my father okay and
in in Judaism one of the core tenants is
that it's the highest it's sort of the
highest Mitzvah it's the highest
commandment to take care of someone
who's died why because they can't
reciprocate most of what we do in life
we have some kind of contract you know
we play by the rules we do things nicely
we have contractors we invest in
Dragon's Den whatever we're going to get
some there's nothing good there's
nothing that will come out of it that
will benefit you I've seen things I've
seen people that are saints that I can't
aspire to even be in their presence of
but it's made my life better I wouldn't
Chang the things that I've done or seen
and you couldn't convince me it wasn't
good for me and as I said before maybe
you think I'm weak but I wouldn't have
done it if I didn't feel it was
commanded to me you you mentioned the
word simulation yeah a second
ago this is something that I've been
thinking a lot
about what is just for people that don't
know what is the simulation Theory and
are we living in a
simulation great question so the
simulation Theory was really conjectured
by a British philosopher or he's
actually Swedish or I believe Nick
Bostrom he conjectured the following he
said compute is getting so phenomenally
powerful in just our recent time Horizon
so the notion that Nick and others had
proposed is that if this is extrapolated
indefinitely into the future whether or
not that can happen is a question about
planetary resources you know part of the
reason Elon wants to go to Mars and I do
want to talk to you about Mars in a bit
um and that uh that extrapolation leads
in exra Le to the to the conclusion that
compute will be effectively free and
it'll be infinite it'll be completely
democra democratized it will be
completely demonetized it will be almost
you know as I said too cheap to to to
measure the expense of computing and
it'll be everywhere uh in just a short
amount of time I mean remember the the
phone that we have uh the iPad that
you're using these are like these things
would literally be a mythological
witchcraft you know 80 years ago and now
they're they're in common place and so
the the notion that Nick proposed Boston
proposed is that that Trend continues
into the future that basically the
capability of those computers would be
to be able to model entire planets
entire ecosystems even cultures
communities maybe even people themselves
so we let's take a parallel um uh DeTour
for just a bit you're not seeing me
necessarily you're seeing photons are
coming into your retinas right photons
are packets of energy form of light they
travel at the speed of light they have
different wavelengths the wavelengths we
call color they're going into your uh
cornea getting bent a little bit then
they're going to your lens getting bent
more then they're going to your retina
and they're getting detected on this
basically uh a detector just like a a
sensor in a camera which has pixels
except it has trillions of pixels
instead of millions of megapixel or few
megapixels and those are being
transduced the color gets transduced on
on cells that are called con cells the
intensity is Rod cells um and and those
are getting transduced into electrical
impulses that go from the uh optic nerve
right into your brain and remember
Andrew hin told you on the show The
Retina is the only part of the human
brain that's outside of the cranium it's
outside of the skull um and so it's a
part of your brain that's outside so it
transduces it makes electrical impulses
those electrical impulses then get
conducted like wires conducting
electricity uh and then those go into
your brain and synapses in your brain
and the neural Pathways in your brain
can reproduce those now you have an
apple Vision Pro I think I I saw you
with once um so that can you know kind
of simulate it could make very accurate
representation of me holographic perhaps
and you would want to reach out and
touch me now imagine instead of just uh
instead of just the um just the raw chem
the physical Electronics of a of a
headset Apple Vision Pro you just inject
the electrical signals into the brain so
that's plausible it's it's just purely
physical material processes uh photons
converted to electrons get converted to
neuron signals get processed in the
brain and so all you have to do is get
that input sensory input you can have a
digital retina a fake retina and you
stimulate it goes into your brain
they're working on that same with sound
sound is even easier you put a little
speaker in your ear and you'd hear um
but uh so the notion is that we could
physically just be disconnected brains
in a vat right we could just be uh in in
this vast system just Bunches of brains
don't ask how they got there but we're
all just receiving stimuli and we're
just being fed I'm being fed an image of
you over there you're being fed an image
of me over here I don't know why nobody
knows why this would occur but the
computing power is there if you think
that the Apple Vision Pro if if you were
alive in
1971 uh you could not have necessarily
predicted the Apple Vision Pro it was
too far Advanced from from what we have
right from what we had at that point in
time but imagine it just keeps
increasing at any rate you like
eventually there'll be a point where
every bit of information every atom in
the universe every Photon in the
universe could theoretically be
simulated again I don't know why this is
but it would be indistinguishable from
our reality according to people like
Nick Bostrom and others that suggests
this is so so that our existence is we
are essentially in a
simulation so the notion is that we're
all these characters in this literal
simulation run on some computering
device some Hardware device that we
don't necessarily understand at this
point and we're calling that God well
that was I was going to get to uh So
eventually you get to a point where if
you could simulate everything then you
would have to ask there must be some
simulator right there must be some
master simulator so let's say I'm a
simulation well who simulated me and
then oh who simulated them and then who
simulated them so that's the recursion
that's infinite regress you can't
actually get to a base level of um you
know a final simulator and if you did it
would kind of be like God like you're
talking about this brain in a jar that's
created out of silicon and and and
oxygen and whatever we're made of but
it's physically created by human beings
what if you can't pay the power bill
that week and um you know you have to
choose between unplugging your
refrigerator or unplugging the brain
like is that killing something you know
like it starts to enter into the realm
of ethics and maybe even these concepts
of a deity what I've heard and I find
quite plausible is um remember I said
the the implication of having infinite
Compu is that you can simulate
everything in the universe yeah uh but
can it simulate itself so I want to
digress into what's called complexity
Theory there are two different types of
of difficult things there's like a
complex thing like building an Airbus
320 it's very complicated right you can
do it if I give you all the parts all
the instructions give you the right
order and I keep you energized like
anybody can follow the instructions and
make it the Earth's weather pattern
state right now is complex there's
there's no way that you can actually
create that like you would need another
plane sized thing to create that that's
called irreducibly complex you cannot
make it simpler and then Build It Up
from simpler and simpler things unlike
an Airbus you can build it up from
smaller and smaller parts and as long as
you follow the recipe you know if you
follow the recipe for the Simon
Observatory you'll get the Simon's
Observatory but if you try to simulate
and it may be the simulate the weather
you do need another planet like we' need
another planet just like the Earth and
then we'd introduce carbon dioxide as
certain rate and we see is it really
going to cause it like that's totally
impractical right so the question of
these things is um is it really a
simulation if it's not 100% like you
could make a very very good weather
simulation we do have that uh but but
famously they're only accurate for a few
days right so so how do you build up you
know an accurate simulator it have to be
the same so in other words do we need
like another is there another Universe
where the simulators are that's equally
complex to the simulation creation that
they made and then did they stop like
did they get are they made of silica are
they artificial are they so there are
proposals that you could detect the
presence it's kind of like you mentioned
the chman show where how all computers
work right now is is on this binary code
zeros and ones five volts zero volts um
but um and that means that the world is
fundamentally discretized it's broken
into little chunks like the screen on
your computer or your iPad it's
pixelated in space we call called voxels
volume elements um and so you can um you
can have an a large number of them but
it's a big difference between a large
number and infinity to really have a
continuous like like um temperature is
continuous like go from 0 degrees to 100
degrees and there's every step in
between but in the simulated world
because you couldn't have you need an
infinite number of computer power to
simulate just from 0 degrees to one
degree not let alone from 0 to 100 or
every possible combination
so at some level you you'd see if you
zoomed in really close on the on the
thermometer you'd see there's a little
jump so you could detect the presence of
the simulator it's more complicated
actually it's done using astrophysical
sources called Gamay burst and other
things that are um that have properties
that are seemingly incompatible with
their being a simulation at the most
distant and therefore earliest moments
in the universe so right now there's
zero evidence for it Nick Bost will tell
you and you should have them on uh that
that you know that that's basically a
copout and and there are ways around
that that uh that fail safe mechanism
aliens do aliens
exist yes aliens do exist uh there's an
old joke they're called hungarians
hungarians are there's so many countries
um so I I yes there's all joke there are
aliens they're Klingons and they're
around Uranus but I wanted to give this
to you Stephen as one of the gifts I've
brought for you today this is some soap
for you this is soap Uranus soap it's
Uranus soap so you want to keep Uranus
clean
um thank you so much in all seriousness
uh there's no evidence for
aliens there's no there's what's I call
possibility does not equal probability
the existence of so many stars in the
universe means there's so many planets
which is true we found almost every
single star has maybe 10 planets around
it and we have a 100 billion in our
galaxy alone there's a 100 billion
galaxies in our universe we're talking a
one with 24 zeros after it that's how
many planets there are in the observable
universe planets planets people say that
means that it's got to be life in the
universe no it doesn't mean anything
there could be uh so many hurdles for
life to get started let alone to create
complex technology producing life like
us that we're essentially we're it and
I'm not saying we are it but I'm saying
there's been
0.00% evidence that life exists beyond
the earth I know you've had Lou alzando
on U the claims that he's making are
controversial they're not scientific
they're government I'm not dismissing
his experiences of people he talks about
they're not persuasive they're not
addressing fundamental characteristics
the universe is vaster than you or I can
comprehend you know if this was our
solar system the nearest star would be
like near in San Diego there's almost no
way for us to comprehend how enormous
our solar our universe is let alone how
vast the cosmos is how much of it can we
see we can see technically we can see a
lot of the universe but most of that is
way before even molecules formed in
other words there's no possibility of
life let's restrict ourselves to the
Milky Way galaxy which is the only
Galaxy we'll ever be able to explore Etc
at least unless we invent Wormhole
travel like Interstellar uh but but for
now we have sent probes the farthest
probe we've ever sent was launched in
1977 it's one light day away from the
earth okay so that means traveling at
the speed of light the fastest speed
possible which is how much miles an hour
186,000 m per second 300,000 km per
second it's only quote it's only gone
one light day away the nearest star is
1,200 times farther away than that it's
four light years away so it'll never get
to that other star I mean it took and it
took 50 years to get one light day so it
need 1,200 times 50 years call it 100 so
you're talking like vast numbers of of
Millennia to get to the nearest star and
that star we don't even know if it has
on it or not and it's not actually going
to that star but the point is the UN the
Galaxy itself is so large and the types
of environments in which life can take
hold are so so precarious it's it's
actually we we tell ourselves a story
like you said with molecules and then
they start to evolve and then they get
it's it's really not known how life got
created it's not known how life came
from non-living material from hydrogen
helium oxygen how that turned into a
cell it's a it's a vast Challen
challenge in what's called organic uh
synthetic organic chemistry and the
formation origin of Life uh and then to
say that those entities then evolved
into some kind of technologically
produced know if we found a dinosaur on
Mars that would be the the discovery of
the of the UN of the history of the
planet of of all time right a or
whatever even a bacterium on Mars there
would be an incredible Discovery so some
people try to defeat this notion and say
well life didn't have to necessarily uh
get started in all these planets it
could have started once and then get
brought to those other planets through
meteorites yeah this was actually
created this theory was created by the
same Fred Hoy who came up with the Big
Bang Theory they called it panspermia
sounds dirty but it's not so these
meteorites could carry genetic material
and they could land on another planet
they could have landed on Earth that's
one theory that life on Earth originated
from another planet that had life on it
and in fact this is one of your lovely
pardon gifts um this is what Elon will
kill for I'm going to give you something
that Elon doesn't have this is a piece
of
Mars This is a real piece of Mars it's
1.52 four gram of another planet I want
you to touch it you can see it's a
little bit reddish like the planet Mars
This is much better than the butt soap
you gave me I gave you a piece of Uranus
and a piece of Mars
here's some information about it I give
out as I said these meteorites on my
website Brian king.com to Lucky winners
each month and I give out the
information this was found in
Africa and how did it get here well a
meteorite hit the planet Mars shattered
off debris that debris orbited around
Mars for millions of years perhaps
eventually had plowed into the Earth and
landed in Africa they found it they said
this they knew it came from space they
analyzed it it has the same chemical
composition molecular structure as the
Landers that are on Mars right now
measure for Mars so we know 100% that's
for Mars it's incredible so Elon is
desperately trying to get there that's
your little piece please than keep it
keep it safe and that's one way that
life could have gotten to Mars from the
Earth right the same thing happens on
the earth as happened to Mars so it
could have hit uh Earth blasted off um
some amibas some orcas some kangaroo
whatever and whatever was on the earth
at the time and then eventually landed
on Mars with the DNA of it but it didn't
take hold right so planets exchange DNA
it is possible but we don't see Life on
Mars if we think about this table yeah
um give to put in context how big the
universe is if the universe was the size
of this table how big would Earth be on
this table uh incomprehensive sensibly
small not even a grain of sand no no not
far far
small fraction Even in our galaxy it
wouldn't be a grain of sand even if this
were our galaxy wouldn't be a grain of
sand no no no our solar our whole solar
system would be perhaps yes one grain of
sand If This Were a Milky Way galaxy
which is 100,000 light years across it
would be like one tiny little grain of
sand what would be of the solar system
out to the planet Neptune so the what's
that 10 planets what something well we
have uh there's eight planets in our
solar system including the Earth used to
be nine but Pluto is no longer a planet
um so and we're about onethird of the
way from the edge of the disc of the
Milky Way so traveling all across there
yes we would be perhaps the entire solar
system actually smaller than maybe half
a grain of sand and can we travel to the
end of the solar system well we sent uh
this object it's gone well beyond it so
the edge of the solar system is about
four light hours so we in 50 years
Stephen we've only gone quote and I'm
not D this is a historic accomplishment
we actually put on these on these
spacecrafts
um digitize pictures of human life of
voices of songs from every continent of
culture of recipes of laughter of
children crying of babies they put this
called the Golden Disc Carl Sean was
responsible for this and they mounted it
to it and it's now uh well as I said 24
light hours away and the farthest edge
of our solar system the planet Neptune
is is four light hours sorry 24 light
hours is the Voyager spacecraft so we've
only gone one six of we've gone only six
times the diameter of our solar system
so our entire solar system would be a
grain of sand on this table less even
yeah about half a grain yeah half a
grain of sand on this this table this
table is about 2 and a half met roughly
big and how many tables are there that's
a very good question we think at least
100 billion
tables each one with 100 billion grains
of sand there are more there are more
grains uh sorry there more stars in the
entire universe that we can observe than
every grain of sand on every Beach on
every continent on our
planet that's really wobbled in my head
so there's our entire solar system is
half of grain of sand on this sort of 2
three meter Table and there are a
hundred billion tables so you know when
you hear that you go okay we really
don't matter like we're really it's it's
so bizarre that we've fallen into the
Trap of believing that we're like
important in any way and then that for
me that even throws another Market
towards religion but the other thing it
makes me go is
surely there's got to be some other life
on one of these grains of sands on the
hundred billion
tables again the well let me just
address the first thing so um you're uh
about 10
maybe 15 trillion times bigger than a
virus or
bacteria um can that bacteria affect you
or a virus hurt you of course it can so
size doesn't really make that big a
difference in this context right Jupiter
is a 100 times you know bigger in
diameter than the earth does it make it
more important I think the Earth is much
more important I like the earth a lot
better um the sun is a hundred times
bigger than Jupiter like would you like
to live there so the point I'm trying to
make is size isn't really that important
numberers not really that important and
remember don't ever forget we're the
only conscious you know entity that we
know about in the universe right there's
there's literally 70 different types of
of primates right like monkeys you
talked about before a bonobos arut none
of them have what we have none of them
can have this probabilistically let me
give you an example uh I've been to
Antarctica twice for bicep experiments
when I go there Antarctica is the
seventh continent to be discovered on
Earth it's approximately 12% of the land
mass of the Earth it's a huge enormous
continent with extreme mountains weather
uh extreme cold but one thing it doesn't
have as much life but if you did that
same thing I said look Stephen there's
this continent you could hardly walk
across it in you know five or six years
even if you're a great athlete you know
people do it but you it would be very
challenging to do it um it's enormous
it's got all the support for life it's
got um hydrocarbons it's got heat it's
got um rocks you can build shelter you
can have water which the most important
thing how much life do you think is
there let me just tell you Stephen
there's uh it makes up 13% of the
Earth's surface there's 8 billion people
on Earth how many how many people do you
think live there I mean as a scientist
you don't have to be a scientist you say
I think there's probably you know maybe
800 million people there there's zero
people there basically so just the
probability I'm not saying it's
impossible probability is not determined
by
possibility because the the thing with
the South Pole is okay so there's no one
there and if if you put me there and
said is there life and I got a telescope
out and I looked around I'd go there's
no life here I can't see anything I
think I'd say I'm the only the only
person here and then i' opposit meaning
to myself I'd say I must be really
important I might think that I'm a God
if if I'm the only life there I'd look
around I for miles and I'd walk for days
and days and days and send out pigeons
and whatever and I go there's no one
it's just me but then little do I know
that although this little space is
inhabitable if you go get on a plane and
go a little bit further you get to the
land of the free right but what if we
can't do that what if there's no plane
what if there's nothing what if this is
all we have I think that a lot of the
sightings and stuff I've interviewed the
top fighter pilot
um you know in the world that claim to
have witnessed these encounters um I've
um you know interviewed the top you know
people that claim these things exist
I've interviewed AI lob he's a good
friend at Harvard who runs a project he
claims he's discovered material from uh
Interstellar you know technology perhaps
like a Garbage barge that was floating
throughout friend he's a very eminent
scientist at no point do I ever
understand the fundamental answer to the
question how did they get here
what properties what physics properties
do they use you know they always say oh
well they defy the laws of physics well
I'm a physicist you know I can
understand some of the most deep physics
you want um and by the way there are
many times in history where if I showed
you something that was made by the US
government you would say that is
witchcraft magic like the iPad thing you
said iPad is just one thing you know
that in the movie 2001 in Space Odyssey
do you know the by the way I have to
tell you this uh if you don't know the
word podcast do you know that comes from
the movie 2001 A Space Odyssey oh yeah I
read the article for it was a yeah it
was an engineer at uh at uh who called
it an iPod and the iPod came from the
pod in 2001 so we owe podcast to 200 so
in that movie there are iPads they're
guys communicating with iPad but they
thought it was like technology of like
20 centuries from now no I'm talking
about the technology it would take to
make
traversable distances out of this
incomprehensible Cosmos that talked
about when you apply that thinking to
God it changes though because earlier
you said we just can't fathom mhm we
can't fathom this Creator and the
factors that would go into this Creator
so we almost have to you know some
people just choose to believe right yeah
and the same can be applied to this
thinking of how they got here was like
listen Maybe we don't know their
technology because it's just
unfathomable like the iPod or the iPad
was 100 years ago you're absolutely
right so if they're just a hundred years
ahead of us technologically we would
think that they were doing witchcraft we
would we wouldn't understand the basis
of the technology that they used to
travel here sure but uh people like Lou
will talk about things that are exactly
um scientific claims one of the things
in his book uh which I read he he hasn't
come on my podcast I'd like to talk to
him but um he talks about these these
craft and and the properties of them and
how when you're inside of them they're
bigger than they are when you're outside
of them um and how they affect and they
they interact with human biology and
cause Burns and and so forth and the
technology he's talking about it's not
like some fifth force that I don't know
about it's using the properties of of
general relativity of SpaceTime uh we do
know enough about these things whereas
God you're right I'm not I'm not being
um so so critical maybe when it comes to
this notion of God but remember I said I
don't I don't have to say I believe in
gravity or in string theory or whatever
we can have evidence for it so when they
make claims that have to do with physics
they should be tested by the laws of
physics when you talk about God saying
I'm stipulating you can't test those
with law with laws and therefore I can't
prove God exist despite how much I would
like to or not like to so what do you
think the probability is that we are
alone do you think we're alone in the
universe I think it's very high you
think it's high I think it's very high
that we're alone let me make an analogy
um for us to be here we Earth had to
have the following circumstances happen
we had to have can you pass me the Moon
the Moon yeah and actually can you pass
the there's a globe behind you love to
have that
perfect okay so I put here a globe and I
put here the moon and these are almost
an exact ratio of size this is about how
big the Moon is compared to the earth
now originally before the moon didn't
exist when the Earth was was first
formed the the Earth condensed out of a
giant version of trillions and trillions
and trillions of tons of these
meteoritic materials they sank to the
bottom made the core of the earth the
earth earth's core is made of iron
heavier lighter elements like carbon
nitrogen oxygen they kind of accreted
onto it and eventually this super planet
formed and that planet or the the early
Earth was called Thea and it was called
that because eventually there was a
planet the size of that give me that
beach ball please Ste a planet about
this size maybe a little bit smaller
just for people that are AR watching
yeah so there's a beach ball that's a
little bit smaller than the globe that
we're looking at it impacted this early
Eartha blasted out material into the
solar system and over millions and
millions of years some of that material
condensed and formed the Moon the Moon
and then the Earth formed as we know it
today uh now the Moon is 250,000 miles
away from the earth it's exactly at the
right place in size that we have tides
on the earth we have ocean tides four
times a day so right now I'm showing
where high tide would be say where this
part of the moon's uh gravity is pulling
on the ocean here so it rises it up that
means that some of the tides on the
other side are also also high tide and
then right angles low tide low tide oh
so that's how the tides work basically
wherever the Moon is it's pulling the
ocean up yeah it's actually pulling the
Earth and the Earth is surrounded by
this this this sphere of water and so it
slash that moves the Earth within that
water and the water gets turned into
like a lazen shape so the High Tides
will be twice a day and the low tides
will be twice a day right angles to them
so that happens and we believe that that
process is what was necessary to make
the materials from the ocean is where
life started and eventually get that on
land and fertilize and make people
eventually okay so remember I'm trying
to explain how we got here so there had
to be this enormous Collision from an a
pre-existing object in our solar system
to create the Moon and the Earth as we
know them now but that wasn't enough
then there had to be these
giant icebergs called comets comets
bombard the Earth over periods of
millions of years the Comets brought the
ocean bearing material that brought
water to the Earth's surface and
minerals and so forth to the Earth's
surface
eventually the Earth cooled down and
those oceans covered about 70% of the
earth's surface is covered by ocean as
shown here so that comment had to occur
that bombardment and the and the um the
fertilization of water or providing of
water hydration of the earth came
courtesy of comets then lastly for us to
be here These Guys these are dinosaurs
here I brought a actual representation
of dinosaurs dinosaurs were roaming the
Earth we know that right uh 65 million
years ago an asteroid about this size
which is about an inch
across hit the Earth traveling
250,000 uh miles per hour something like
that hit it near uh Mexico in the
Yucatan Peninsula right here created
this enormous Devastation this crater
that obliterated the atmosphere filled
the atmosphere with pollution and and
basically made like nuclear winter like
you and Annie talked about and that cut
off light to uh plants and eventually
the Dinosaurs most of the Dinosaurs all
the dinosaurs died now that allowed
mammals the first mammals were little
tiny rodents rats right and I believe
all evolution is true right so those
little rats then eventually evolved and
made whales and people and and bats and
all sorts of cool stuff and eventually
we came from that so I've described to
you three very important bombardments of
the Earth One Earth's Moon form from a
huge Collision two comets bombard the
Earth flooding it with water just the
right amount not too much not too little
is perfect and three a meteor kills off
the dinosaurs if any of those came in a
different order we would likely not be
here so not only do they occur three
incredibly improbable things that she
would never predict would occur in that
order happen to occur and they happen to
occur in the right order the first two
created life though right say again it
was the first two of those three that
created life potent allowed for life to
exist yes you're right but remember I'm
trying to explain how doac occurs right
for us to be here if there dinosaurs
here if the dinosaurs had a space
program you know where they could zap
away with a laser and they could deflect
the asteroid they would have done it and
we wouldn't be here likely okay so
you're right but let's say those events
occurred in a different in a different
uh pattern the small asteroid hit the
Earth First nothing happens there's no
dinosaurs to kill uh then the Comets
come in flood the Earth with ocean but
then this huge uh you know uh this Thea
hits the the Earth forms into its Moon
that would have boiled off all the ocean
as well so we wouldn't have any water
there for life to exist on and then the
dinosaurs wouldn't even need to exist so
those are just three things Stephen by
the way we have also the planet Jupiter
I talked about before Galileo discovered
its moons Jupiter is like a bodyguard it
protects the Earth from almost every
major deadly impact the Moon is also
like a bodyguard see all the craters on
this Moon that my son 3D printed he's
proud to show it to you yeah these are
death strikes that could have taken out
the earth look how big some of them are
they're as big as the Earth as the
dinosaur killing meteorite in some cases
so we have all these conditions now I've
only named five or six imagine each one
of the five or six only occurs with a
probability of one in 10,000 one part
and 10 to the 4th well guess what
happens you take 10 one in 10,000
multiply by 1 in 10,000 1 in 10,000 6
times to say that you get a number
that's smaller than the number of
planets in the
universe in other words the probability
of all just those six things I think
there's trillions of things how life
formed the cell formed the chemistry the
biology and and the culture whatever all
those things that form to make us
technological I think the probability is
is extremely small which is why I said I
think the probability is low that we are
that there are other life forms or in
another way to say it I think it's very
high that we are alone and that might be
for a reason you know there might be
some reason maybe we're meant to really
take care of Earth maybe we're meant to
really appreciate the blessings of what
we have on Earth if you're an
entrepreneur you're probably going to
want to listen to this it's a message
from one of our sponsors on this podcast
which is LinkedIn if you've listened to
me on this podcast for a while now
you'll know that I've been on a bit of
an evolution as a business owner and
entrepreneur and one of those Evolutions
that has become clearer and clearer as
I've matured is that the single most
important thing in building a business
in building a company is hiring the
definition of the word company is
actually group of people and that is the
first responsibility and job that any
entrepreneur has and should focus on but
surprisingly most don't about 80 % of my
team have been hired from LinkedIn and I
think there's very few platforms if any
in the world that could give you that
diversity of candidate with that much
information and data on their profiles
it usually costs money but for the
entrepreneurs that are listening to me
I've got you a free job ad post for your
company on LinkedIn just go to
linkedin.com
doac to post your free job ad today
that's linkedin.com doac terms and
conditions apply this is quite
interesting 85% of Internet users have
heard of VPN but only 55% know what they
do if you're in that group let me
explain vpns enable your location online
to differ from where you actually are
geographically to help you browse and
stream sites that would otherwise be
unavailable to you I use nordvpn who are
a sponsor of this show to watch
Manchester United games online no matter
where I am in the world and Indie from
my team uses them whenever she's booking
flights back home to New Zealand having
a different online location mean she can
take advantage of dynamic pricing and
get cheaper prices for her flights
nordvpn is the fastest VPN in the world
and just one account can be used across
10 devices and they've shared a generous
offer for my listeners a discount and
four additional months free on a 2-year
plan it's also completely risk-free with
nd's 30-day money back guarantee so head
to nordvpn.com
doac or click the link in the
description below star signs and
horoscopes yeah is there any
possibility in your view from everything
you've you've done in your research and
your studies of the universe is there
any possibility that anything up there
in the stars is determining our outcomes
and our personality and whether he's
goingon to dump me or I'm gonna do well
on bitcoin is there anything uh no there
there's there's no evidence for it in
the sense that you can do randomized
control trials or double blind surveys
you can do exact simulations as I said
it the the theory that the position of
Jupiter at the moment that you were born
can literally be replicated there's
something like a million people born
every day and then at the exact same
time there's probably you 14,000 or what
you know you could do the math and
figure it out um for them all to have
for no person to ever have you know sort
of duplication of luck or circumstance
the the effect in terms of physical
forces the gravity of Jupiter the the
pull of of the Sun the position of the
Earth in the day you were born now there
are correlation effects right so you
have to be careful not to confuse
correlation with causation right so some
I'm actually born on the most um
frequently frequent birthday uh on all
the calendar September 9th now what is
septe September 9th is about nine months
after the holiday season right so in a
western culture you know women are party
maybe my mom and my dad had a nice you
know New Year's Eve or Christmas party
or whatever and that's led to me being
here right so there are correlation and
then that so that means that there's a
lot of people that are Virgos born on
September 9th none of which are like me
or in the southern hemisphere versus the
Northern Hemisphere a woman who has
gestation during the summer might feel
differently than if she's gestating
during the winter even though the babies
are born at the same day right they're
just born on opposite sides of the earth
so they will have very different
personalities whereas astrology says
they should be the
same it's interesting because people
will especially people that are precious
about horoscopes and astrology and those
kinds of things will
say I have just as much evidence for my
thing as you do for your thing like they
because they they almost consider it to
be a religious belief the people that I
know literally some people have designed
their entire lives and the meaning of
their life around meaning that they're
finding out in by looking up at the
stars how's it different from religion
astrology um there are elements of
religion yeah certainly It came it came
out of religion I don't think people now
worship you know constellations or I
don't think there's many major religions
that are based on astrological you know
contemplation but maybe without the
worship part but they they're seeking
guidance in their lives they're getting
answers from the Stars they're making
decisions based on it much of their
moral compass is being determined like M
much of their um yeah much of their
morals and ethics and decisions and
behaviors are being determined by by it
in the same way that it's being
determined by someone that believes in a
God yeah it's hard to you know it's I'm
a wrong person ask some why why do
people need this people need answers to
to to contemplate the universe first of
all it's a scary Universe right we we we
confronted by things that none none of
us can understand entirety of uh no
brightest Nobel Prize winners the the
greatest scientists the greatest
thinkers can't really contemplate it so
we we go through life we try to make the
best of it but we also have this sense
of self and this theory of self the
theory of mind that you know we can
relate to other people and we want
answers we want and I think that is in
common I think you're right religion is
very I almost wish I did you ever wish
that you were more religious I mean yeah
I wish I was too and I'm not and I
hopefully my kids won't hear no I heard
from a psychologist once he said you
should Endeavor in your life that you
pass on only half of your Neurosis to
your kids Neurosis um crazy anxieties
fears weird pathology you know
psychological
deficiencies because if every parent did
that you know the species is going to
get better and better but if you keep
making everyone as anxious as nervous
and there's no progress in history a lot
of the zodiac religions that you talked
about or astrological religions they
view time as a as a circle in other
words a flat circle a spiral goes into
the future that's Western Civilization
that's progress in science that's
forward moving to the Stars to wherever
we're going to go and more and more
human knowledge and flourishing but if
you just say I'm committed to I'm going
to be repeating every year on the
birthday I'm going to be repeating what
all that my ancestors did that's very
depressing and it doesn't lead to
Innovation to find cures for diseases to
find explanations for fields and forces
and technology that we have so what is
the what the meaning of life ah glad you
asked um to
me the meaning of life is to do as many
things that if taken away from you would
be devastating to
you that which you do should be so
consequential that to not have done it
or not have it would literally destroy
you to your core for me it's my kids
those connections the the bonds the the
the hopefulness for the future I never
said this Stephen
but I don't get too emotional but I
think about death a lot more you know
especially in my case since October 7th
last year A lot of my friends and family
were impacted by that in Israel and it's
I've never cried so many times than I
have in the past year but thinking about
all those you know kind of tears and and
emotions and saying do I wish I never f
that do I wish I didn't have the pain if
I meant I didn't have the joy of having
those people in my life and I'm not
ready to die I'm hopefully you know
maybe middle age I don't know I don't
know if I live to 104 but hopefully you
know maybe I
will but I've done a lot in my life I've
done things that you know I didn't think
I could do when I was a kid I've married
the love of my life I've brought
incredible Souls into the world if I did
die I'm not scared I don't want to I'm
working on my body I'm working on my
diet I'm trying to do what's right for
me and so I can be her as long as
possible but the meaning of life is
making connections it's making these
bonds such that you
know you hope that people will be sad
devastated even when you're gone so too
the connections that I've made I can't
see my life without them I don't want to
I don't think think about it it's morbid
to me it's make those connections while
you can not I mean when I listen to that
episode that you did with Annie Jacobs
it's terrifying right and you were like
visibly scared in that episode she's
amazing we don't know I mean God forbid
I don't think it's super as likely maybe
as she maybe it is maybe it isn't maybe
I'm na but the point is we don't know
the point is we're here now the point is
we might be alone but that should fill
us with meaning to do what we can do
uniquely
so before you had
kids what was the meaning of your
life uh it was very easy I wanted to win
a Nobel Prize and that's changed now it
has it has uh partially because my
father was a great scientist I want to
show him up he never won a Nobel Prize
he won a lot of awards I want to show
him up now he's dead you know there's no
one to prove stuff to you know you
should live life to impress yourself and
I feel like yeah if they gave me the
Nobel Prize if someday I would Merit it
with my team of these brilliant
scientists just that's pretty unlikely
but let's say it happened it doesn't it
doesn't mean what it once meant to me
when I was your age when it when when I
was your age it wasn't Idol to me it was
a God Like You Win it you're as close to
Scientific royalty and Godlike status as
possible to imagine much more than Oscar
gold medal in the Olympics it is every
there's only 200 or so I've ever won it
it's like a small book and actually I've
talked to people that have won it
actually the forward to the my second
book into the apostles was written by
Barry barish he won the 2017 Nobel Prize
he told me Brian um because I always ask
my final question I know we're getting
to the end here like your final question
I learned from you I have my own final
question it's um if you could go back in
the past and meet your 20-year-old self
what would you say to him to give him
the courage to do as you've done to go
into the impossible and he said to me
Brian I would say to stop having the
impostor syndrome and I said well you
know yeah you just tell me you won the
Nobel Prize and he won't no no no I have
the impostor syndrome now said Barry
you're kidding me you won the Nobel
Prize how could you possibly have
impostor syndrome he said Brian let me
tell you something when you win a Nobel
Prize you go to Stockholm you meet the
king of Sweden they give you this buffet
dinner you're dressed in white tie not
Black Tie white tie you get this huge
gold medal solid gold you get a million
dollars
possibly and they want to make sure
you're not going to come back and say
hey uh Gustav there uh where's my money
where's my so they make you sign a
ledger not unlike The Ledger in front of
you and it has your signature I Barry
bars received the Nobel Prize and Barry
said I took that book the first thing I
did is I turned the P who won it last
year who won it the year before who
wanted I saw Richard Fineman I saw Marie
curee I saw Albert Einstein
he said I don't deserve to be in the
same universe as Albert Einstein let
alone in the same book how could they
give the same prize to me they gave to
him and I realized this was like an idol
to him too I said Barry I've got good
news for you Albert Einstein had the
impostor syndrome he's like you're
kidding me I said no no no Barry he had
the impostor syndrome and his hero was
Isaac Newton Einstein said Isaac Newton
did more for Science and Western
Civilization than any human being before
or since that's a pretty tall order How
Could Einstein live up to that but I
said Barry go one step deeper Isaac
Newton had the impostor syndrome what
the heck how could he he's a greatest
might invented calculus discovered the
laws of universal gravitation the
principles of Optics invented this
telescope no no no he felt wholly
entirely Unworthy of his hero Jesus
Christ so much so Stephen that he
attempted to do the same thing that
Jesus Christ did he knew he couldn't
work miracles he knew he couldn't walk
on water and turn loaves into fishes but
he could do it was in some sense a
greater struggle which was to die a
virgin as Jesus did and so he did so the
lesson
is impostor syndroms normal don't don't
idolize something literally get a Graven
golden image of a man who who cares he's
a man I don't care I I take time home
with my family over that on a Shabbat as
I invite you down to come to me in San
Diego anytime you
want I didn't realize that all of these
great individuals felt like imposters
themselves which is um I think will
liberate a lot of people from the way
that they feel I mean we I feel this
every day like people int introduce me
on stage as like an interview or a
podcast I'm like what the just was
never conceivable to me and I know
Jack's talked about the same thing like
it's never conce able to me that I'd be
doing a podcast and it' be big and that
people would think you're good at it in
some way for some bizarre reason no
you're not just good Stephen come on
you're an elite level you're a no PR
what is that what is that though I mean
and how did that happen I didn't go to
school for that I just sat here and
started asking people questions in my
kitchen and then more people tuned in
and they said you're good at it I'm like
what what does good mean I don't do it
the same as Rogan and Rogan's good at it
and huberman's good at it I've been with
them all look you're you have a unique
angle that that is not rep replicable
but I want to leave you with the mission
that kind of has guided me and again
I've learned a lot from you for you know
it's no secret I have the high energy
opening to the into the can you imagine
how hard it is to take like someone who
studied like some chemical pathway and
some thermodynamic system to make it
like the hype show that you guys open
each epe with I learned that from you
but Carl Sean said what an amazing thing
a book is in it you have the words of a
long dead author and you're reading it
to yourself and he or she is
communicating with you across the ages
nowadays people millions of people have
you in their ears and you're
communicating potentially across the
generations and you're again I don't
want to keep be you know be like a
Jewish mother but your kids your your
grandkids they're going to have access
to this it's not going to be some some
even a book which is wonderful but it's
going to be visceral Audible and it's
going to have an impact you can't even
imagine right
now creep me out I'm like wow the
meteors didn't do it
crazy to think about the the impact and
the lasting impact that this
medium might have because of the
internet but just even I mean even books
now the books are turned into audio
books into digital books and such um
look at this the last election this was
like the podcast election right not
going on a podcast going on a podcast um
and and there are many people that
attempt to imitate what you do and and
you know it it's it's I I don't do it
for money I don't do it it's not my
career I do it for fun because I want to
give back to to Young people the way
that I learned from Carl San or Isaac
azimoff I read their books it inspired
to me to be a scientist when Co hit in
2020 they couldn't do book tours and so
I invited all my scientist friends to
come on I had some Nobel Prize winners
come on and it just keeps amplifying but
I view it as you know for me it's a it's
a passion project but it's a way of
giving back returning to the community
from whom I've taken so much I've
learned so much with that in mind with
this knowledge that what we're creating
what all of us are creating whether you
have a podcast or not or you're just
writing on the internet whatever it
might be with the knowledge that it's
going to sustain and it's going to be
here potentially in many generations to
come how does that how is that supposed
to change how someone creates because
I'm thinking you just said that to me I
was like Jesus Christ that's quite
profound but then seconds later I was
like almost like the simulation Theory I
just thought it crack on do you
know what I mean just carry on with what
you're doing because if you can you can
get too deep into it that you can either
distract yourself or ruin yourself from
the essence of what makes the thing
special so am I meant to Chang in any
way with that knowledge I think you I
think you are I think you're doing it
already I mean you've spoken again I've
you know try to study the the the
glimpses of of morsels that I can
comprehend the experimentation process
is a process of fundamentally being
dissatisfied with the current product
even though it's wonderful and it's
great it's top top you know leading in
its category but still just not being
satisfied you always want to make it a
little bit better see what works see
what doesn't work that's pleasurable
because you even when you get a failed
there's no such thing as a failed
experiment I tell my students you always
learn something and that brings you
closer to truth and that's what is so
meaningful what I was wondering what I
thought you were going to say is like
when you're out in public and people see
you and I asked this of Lex and Joe I
want to ask you to has put on my podcast
or how turn the microphone to you um
there's a there's a scene in the book
Animal Farm um where there's this donkey
named Benjamin and he's talking to the
pig um and the pig says to the donkey um
you know I love your tail it's so big I
got this short little curly tail it's
good for nothing you got this beautiful
tail it could sweep away the the Flies
and the donkey says yeah but you know
what I wish I didn't have the Flies so I
wouldn't need the tail I want ask you do
you ever worry about the attention would
you ever trade the attention the fame
the lack of privacy the intrusions the
you know everything for for the
alternative I don't know would you it's
funny because when I go towards that
question and I remove the all the
downsides from my life they're like
glued to the upsides so I'm like
so it's always a question of like is the
trade-off worth it is the question that
I ask myself all the time every week
every month and I remind myself
sometimes I said this to Trevor no but
he told me that it gets to a point where
you can't just reverse the decision
right I try to remind myself that
there's I could delete this podcast I
could quit Dragon Den I could delete all
my social media channels and I could
right now go to Barley and I was playing
this out the other day in my head I was
thinking you know if if if I say to
myself that I'm optimizing for peace in
this season of my life then why the hell
am I doing all this stuff this is peace
necessarily um and then I play out the
scenario I okay so I'll move to Barley
I'll I'll I'll chill out there I've got
the the financial means to just live
there for the rest of my life I'll chill
and then I'll
start I know you're this is where it
goes it okay and then I'll start I'll
start writing yeah and then and then you
know I might start making videos about
what I'm writing about because that's
what I'll behind the diary yeah and I'll
start painting and you start creating
again and then if the Creations are good
you want to show it and then you going
to share it to someone and then they're
going to buy and whatever and then
you're back here again look I think
that's what you're meant to do I think
you know people have a mission in life
you know I don't have a body you know to
be an Olympic Athlete you know but you
know I have a mind or curiosity this is
what you good at this is what you should
lean in I always feel like do I teach my
students to like overcome their
deficiencies or do I teach them to lean
into their successes I always feel like
progress feels good no matter what I'm
trying to lose weight I lose a pound it
feels so much better to lose a pound
than gaining you know it feels awful to
gain an ounce you know so the the fact
is are you useful are you doing you know
Freud said there's only two things in
life work and love it's all you got to
do you were doing your work doing your
love take your vacation and uh enjoy
Bali for a while it lasts and then come
right
back Brian we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for and the question that's been left
for you is if you found out that the
world was ending in 10
minutes who would you want to speak to
and what would you tell them a it's easy
I mean it's horrifying but it's but it's
easy well first of all i' you know call
my friends at Nasa and tell them to
direct the giant space La no it would be
my wife my wife you know it's funny to
to think about how I'm probable Life Is
But when I got fired I told you from
Stanford she was actually an
undergraduate there and luckily we
missed because I'm eight and a half
years older than her and I'd be some
lecherous 28y old when she was 20 I got
fired
I felt it was horrible turned out to be
the best thing that ever happened to me
it got me a job that job led to this
experiment called bicep that experiment
called bicep took me to the South Pole
took me to the brink of a Nobel Prize
but it also brought me to San Diego
which is her hometown we would not have
met there's no we didn't meet at
Stanford we were literally 100 feet away
from each other at one point we wouldn't
we wouldn't have met she was meant to be
if I hadn't gotten fired if I hadn't
been dreaming and fantasizing about
experiments that I wanted to do not to
be someone else's employee but to be my
own CEO my own world my own laboratory
my own brand I wouldn't have met her I
wouldn't have my precious precious
kids there's no doubt it would be to
call her what would you what would you
tell
him I would just reminisce about how we
met and what we brought into the world
and you know kind of uh sure we'd laugh
and cry Brian thank
you really appreciate it it's been such
a wonderful conversation and I highly
implore everybody that's listening to go
and check out your show to go and read
your books all of which I'll link below
super fascinating and also to go to your
website if they want to be in with a
chance of winning some of this space
material which is I'm so it's amazing
that I have this I'm such a big fan of
space so and SpaceX and everything
that's going on out there in the
universe so thank you so much for this
present you can keep the Uranus soap um
but I'll keep the piece of Mars um the
work you're doing is so important
because it's helping to demystify
and helping us to understand the nature
of some of these really profound
questions not ever because you know
we're seeking to figure it all out so
that we can change how we
live but just because there's so much
Beauty and joy and um meaning that is
derived irrespective of what the answer
is and I and I I it's people like you
that blow our minds open in a way that
helps me even though I'm never going to
build a telescope and I'm never going to
go to this the the South Pole and I'm
never going to point it at the sky and
I'm not never going to seek to answer
these questions in my life but your work
expands my mind it expands my my like
thoughts of like possibilities and as an
entrepreneur as a Creator I think that's
a net positive for for everyone that
receives the work that you do um it's so
Wonder it's so bizarre that we're so
we're so curious about about the stars
but it's such a beautiful thing um and
long may you continue there's very few
people like you and I was thinking the
minute we got going today I was thinking
there's very few people in the world
that are both smart which is I think
pretty common but but then able to
communicate and that is really I've met
you and Neil de degrass Tyson who have
this remarkable ability to communicate
science in a way that inspires
galvanizes and sort of cultivates
curiosity it's a really wonderful thing
I appreciate that and it's exceptionally
rare that combination of forces like you
said about the probability of the Comet
hitting the universe and that bouncing
off and creating a moon the probability
of those two things happening in the
same place is so exceptionally rare but
it's wonderful that we have people like
you in this world of podcasting because
you know maybe once upon a time the um
it would have been harder to hear your
voice but now everybody can go and
listen to you um and I highly recommend
they do your YouTube channel is
exceptional so thank you so much Brian
thank you it's been it's been an
absolute pleasure it's been an honor for
me thank you
Stephen this diary won't change your
life but the Habit it teaches you
definitely will the most unhelpful
advice that I ever received don't sweat
the small stuff you have to sweat the
small stuff I sweat the small stuff I
always have and I always proudly will
because small things that are easy to do
are also easy not to do it is easy to
save a dollar so it's also easy not do
it is easy to brush your teeth so it's
also easy not to it is easy to make a 1%
Improvement so it's also easy not to
understanding the power of compounding
1% you can absolutely change your
outcomes in your life it is n about
drastic Transformations or quick wins
it's about the small consistent actions
that have a lasting change on your
outcomes so two years ago we started the
process of creating this beautiful diary
and it's truly beautiful inside there's
lots of pictures lots of inspiration and
motivation as well some interact
developments and the purpose of this
diary is to help you identify stay
focused on develop consistency with the
1% that will ultimately change your life
we're only going to do a limited run of
these Diaries so if you you want one for
yourself or for a friend or for a
colleague or for your team then head to
the diary.com right now I'll link it
below
[Music]
h